remote filename path traversal in curl tool for Windows
========================================================

Project curl Security Advisory, January 27th 2016 -
[Permalink](https://curl.se/docs/CVE-2016-0754.html)

VULNERABILITY
-------------

curl does not sanitize colons in a remote filename that is used as the local
filename. This may lead to a vulnerability on systems where the colon is a
special path character. Currently Windows is the only OS where this
vulnerability applies.

curl offers command line options --remote-name (also usable as `-O`) and
`--remote-header-name` (also usable as `-J`). When both of those options are
used together (-OJ) and the server provides a remote filename for the content,
curl writes its output to that server-provided filename, as long as that file
does not already exist. If it does exist curl fails to write.

If both options are used together (`-OJ`) but the server does not provide a
remote filename, or if `-O` is used without `-J`, curl writes output to a
filename based solely on the remote filename in the URL string provided by the
user, regardless of whether or not that file already exists.

In either case curl does not sanitize colons in the filename. As a result in
Windows it is possible and unintended behavior for curl to write to a file in
the working directory of a drive that is not the current drive (i.e. outside
the current working directory), and also possible to write to a file's
alternate data stream.

For example if curl `-OJ` and the server sends filename=f:foo curl incorrectly
writes foo to the working directory for drive F even if drive F is not the
current drive. For a more detailed explanation see the 'MORE BACKGROUND AND
EXAMPLE' section towards the end of this advisory.

Though no known exploit is available for this issue at the time of the
publication, writing one would be undemanding and could be serious depending
on the name of the file and where it ends up being written.

INFO
----

This flaw only affects the curl command line tool as this is a feature not
present or provided by libcurl.

The Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) project has assigned the name
CVE-2016-0754 to this issue.

CWE-22: Improper Limitation of a Pathname to a Restricted Directory ('Path Traversal')

Severity: High

AFFECTED VERSIONS
-----------------

In the case of using a remote filename provided by the user (`-O` without
`-J`), the feature has existed since inception.

- Affected versions: curl 4.0 to and including 7.46.0
- Not affected versions: curl >= 7.47.0

In the case of using a remote filename provided by the server (`-OJ`), the
feature was added in 7.20.0 and did not exist before then.

curl built for Cygwin is partially affected (`-O`): curl <= 7.47.0. Please
refer to the CYGWIN addendum at the end of this advisory. (Added 2016-02-07)

SOLUTION
------------

Starting in curl 7.47.0 the curl tool in Windows replaces all colons in a
remote filename with underscores. For example if `f:foo::$DATA` is the remote
filename, it is sanitized to `f_foo__$DATA` .

- Fixed-in: https://github.com/curl/curl/commit/3017d8a8d8849ebd4feae4f5

Exercise judicious use of the `-J` option. The `-J` option when combined with
`-O` lets the server choose the filename. Do you trust the server you are
using the `-J` option on? Is your connection to the server vulnerable to a
man-in-the-middle attack? Have you enabled location redirects and the server
may send you somewhere untrustworthy? In any of these cases, even with this
vulnerability fixed know that if you use the `-J` option it still is possible
for a rogue server to send you the name of a DLL or other file that could
possibly be loaded automatically by Windows or some third party software.

RECOMMENDATIONS
---------------

We suggest you take one of the following actions immediately, in order of
preference:

 A - Upgrade curl and libcurl to version 7.47.1.

 B - Apply the patch to your version and rebuild.

 C - If you cannot do (A) or (B) it is suggested you do not use `-J` on
     Windows. If you choose to continue to use `-O` without `-J` it is your
     responsibility to check that the URL you pass does not have a remote file
     name that could be exploited.

Regardless of which action you take, exercise judicious use of the `-J` option
as described in THE SOLUTION.

TIMELINE
---------

It was first reported to the curl project on November 30 2015. We contacted
distros@openwall on January 21 2016.

curl 7.47.0 was released on January 27 2016, coordinated with the publication
of this advisory.

curl 7.47.1 was released the week of February 8, 2016 to address
over-sanitation of an `--output` path caused by the first revision of the
patch for this issue; and additionally to not allow curl built for Cygwin to
write outside the current working directory when a backslash is in the remote
filename (`-O`).

CREDITS
-------

- Reported-by: Ray Satiro (Jay)
- Patched-by: Ray Satiro (Jay)

Thanks a lot!

MORE BACKGROUND AND EXAMPLE
---------------------------

In Windows if a colon is used to specify a drive letter for a path and there
is a slash or backslash (hereafter path separator) that proceeds the colon it
means start from the root of the drive, but if that slash is omitted it means
start from the current working directory of the drive.

 - `C:\foo` => Windows looks for foo in the root directory of drive C.
 - `C:foo` => Windows looks for foo in the working directory of drive C.

---

A process in Windows on its creation may inherit a list of drives and their
working directories from its parent, and one of those is the current working
directory.

For example a command prompt is open and has these working directories:

 - Drive C, Path `\bar\baz\`
 - Drive D, Path `\`
 - Drive E, Path `\qux\`    <-- Current
 - Drive F, Path `\`

Assume other drives were not accessed which means they default to their root.

A user running curl from that command prompt would expect that their file is
output to the current working directory, `E:\qux\` in this example. However
that may not happen if there is a colon in the filename.

curl has a function which strips the path to get the filename by removing the
last path separator and everything that precedes it. In the case of a colon
without a path separator that comes after it, it is not removed from the file
name.

Following this example:

In the case of `-O` without `-J` recall that the filename is parsed from the
user- supplied URL, and is written regardless of whether the file already
exists.

`curl -O http://somewhere/f:foo` => curl writes output to `f:\foo`

`curl -O http://somewhere/c:foo` => curl writes output to `c:\bar\baz\foo`

In the case of `-O` with `-J` recall that the filename is parsed from the
server's "Content-Disposition:" header if one is given (for example
`Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=abc`) and in that case the file is
written only if it does not already exist.

`curl -OJ http://somewhere/somefile` => Server sends `filename=f:foo`
                                        curl writes output to `f:\foo`

`curl -OJ http://somewhere/somefile` => Server sends `filename=c:foo`
                                        curl writes output to `c:\bar\baz\foo`

CYGWIN
------
(Added 2016-02-07) Since the original publishing of this advisory it has been
determined that curl built for Cygwin is partially vulnerable.

By default Cygwin sanitizes colons and other banned filename characters by
replacing them with Unicode characters. However Cygwin does not do this for
the backslash and in such a case may not map a colon that precedes a backslash
to a Unicode character. In curl <= 7.47.0 built for Cygwin it is possible to
write outside the current working directory by specifying a remote filename
with backslashes.

For example:

`curl -O 'http://example.com/F:\foo'` saves to F:\foo.

- (Cygwin) Affected versions (`-O`): curl <= 7.47.0
- (Cygwin) Not affected versions (`-O`): curl >= 7.47.1

curl built for Cygwin is not vulnerable to an (`-OJ`) rogue server attack,
therefore the scope of this vulnerability as it applies to Cygwin is limited
to unchecked user input, such as if you have a script that is passing an
untrusted URL to curl built for Cygwin.

curl 7.47.1 checks for backslashes for all operating systems: A remote file
name is parsed from the URL by removing anything up to and including the last
forward slash or back slash of the URL's path segment.
